docs: cover validation changes in upgrading guide (#2544)
vaadin/docs: articles/upgrading/index.adoc

include::_styling.adoc[]
====

== Field Validation Changes

Vaadin 24 introduces several major changes in field component validation, aiming to address various issues and UX inconsistencies that has been reported in the previous versions.

=== Binder Takes Into Account Component Constraints

Every field component provides its own set of constraints such as `required`, `minlength`, `pattern`, etc.

**Before:**

When using Binder, component constraints were ignored. They could still affect the client-side invalid state without reflecting that to the server.

**After:**

Component constraints are integrated into Binder validation. Binder checks the value against constraints before custom validators.

The only exception is the required constraint. It doesn't participate in Binder validation since Binder provides its own `asRequired` validator.

**Known issues:**

- It's currently not possible to configure custom error messages for constraints (https://github.com/vaadin/flow-components/issues/4618[flow-components#4618]).

> - It's currently not possible to revert Binder's behavior to ignore constraints as before, except by removing constraints from the component at all.

Author: ```suggestion
- It's currently not possible to revert Binder's behavior to ignore constraints as before, except by removing constraints from the component at all (https://github.com/vaadin/flow/issues/17178[flow#17178]).
```

=== Blur Triggers Server-Side Validation

**Before:**

Both constraint and Binder validation were only triggered on `ValueChangeEvent`, while client-side validation was completely disregarded.

**After:**

> The server-side validation timing is aligned with client-side validation, meaning that whenever the web component validation occurs, it triggers the corresponding validation in the Flow component. In practice, it means that the server-side validation will also be performed on blur (i.e., when the component loses focus).

Author: ```suggestion
The server-side validation timing is aligned with client-side validation, meaning that whenever the web component validation occurs, it triggers the corresponding validation in the Flow component. In practice, it means that the server-side validation will also be performed on blur (the web component runs validation on blur to identify possible bad input). 

```

Reviewer: yeah, I think that's good enough as an explanation.

**Known issues:**

- As a result, the server-side validation can be triggered more frequently than necessary. For example, if you edit a Text Field and then blur, both value-changed and blur events will fire at the same time, resulting in double validation in a single roud-trip (https://github.com/vaadin/flow-components/issues/4390[flow-components#4390]).

=== Entering Bad Input Invalidates The Component

Date Picker, Integer Field, and some other similar components only accept user input that can be parsed as a `LocalDate`, `Integer`, etc. Otherwise, the value on the server falls back to `null`.

**Before:**

Entering bad input didn't invalidate the component because the server treated this case as an empty value.

**After:**

> The server detects if the user has entered any input. When the input cannot be parsed, it's considered bad input, causing constraint validation to fail once the user presses Enter or removes focus from the component.

Author: ```suggestion
The server is aware if the user has entered any input. When the input cannot be parsed, it's considered bad input, causing constraint validation to fail once the user presses Enter or removes focus from the component.
```

**Before:**

When using Binder, component constraints were ignored. They could still affect the client-side invalid state but it wasn't reflected to the server.

**After:**

Component constraints are integrated into Binder validation. Binder checks the value against constraints before custom validators.

The only exception is the required constraint. It doesn't participate in Binder validation since Binder provides its own `asRequired` validator.

**Known issues:**

- It's currently not possible to configure custom error messages for constraints (https://github.com/vaadin/flow-components/issues/4618[flow-components#4618]).
- It's currently not possible to revert Binder's behavior to ignore constraints as before, except by removing constraints from the component at all.

=== Blur Triggers Server-Side Validation

**Before:**

Both constraint and Binder validation were only triggered on `ValueChangeEvent`, while client-side validation was completely disregarded.

**After:**

The server-side validation timing is aligned with client-side validation, meaning that whenever the web component validation occurs, it triggers the corresponding validation in the Flow component.

> In practice, it means that the server-side validation will also be performed on blur. This resolves issues of required fields not getting invalidated after the initial user interaction.

Reviewer 2: > This resolves issues of required fields not getting invalidated after the initial user interaction.

I would personally argue that this is a bug in itself and should not be sold as feature 😉 

Jumping in a required field (not typing anything) and pressing tab to go to the next field, should not mark the field as invalid in my opinion.

Author: Thanks, I removed this part to avoid potential controversies.

Author: I added https://github.com/vaadin/web-components/issues/6146 to the list of known issues. Closing the thread.
